KEP-4622: New TopologyManager Policy: max-allowable-numa-nodes (#4624)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4622-topologymanager-max-allowable-numa-nodes/README.md

## Goals

- This proposal does not aim to modify the existing TopologyManager Policies. It focuses solely on introducing a new policy option to let users configure the maximum supported number of NUMA nodes.
- Support high-end CPUs with more than 8 NUMA nodes.

## Non-Goals

- It does not address other resource allocation or management aspects within Kubernetes.
- It does not attempt to remove the state explosion that still exists in the TopologyManager.

### User Stories (Optional)
#### Story 1

As a developer in the AI space, I want to use AI accelerators "super chips" which expose ARM cores with more than 8 NUMA nodes.  

#### Story 2

As a user in the high-performance-computing space, I want to enable the sub-NUMA or NUMA-per-socket option of my high-end x86 CPU, which will bring  
the count of NUMA nodes to exceed 8.  

#### Story 3

> As an administrator of edge nodes, I want to use power-efficient yet massively parallel ARM chips which expose more 

Reviewer: this is not a full sentence.

Author: Fixed.

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

Rollout or upgrade do not impact already running workloads. We plan to add an e2e test for this in the furture.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

<!--
Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.
-->
No.

### Monitoring Requirements

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->
We add a metric: `kubelet_topology_manager_admission_time` for kubelet, which can be used to check if the setting is causing unacceptable performance drops.

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->

> Examine the kubelet configuration of a node to verify the existence of the feature gate and the utilization of the new policy option.

Reviewer 2: Per the comment for this question, is it possible to use a metric here?  Could we add one?  If that's not possible, can we be as prescriptive as possible in explaining exactly how to check a workload via the API?  I.e an exact kubectl command for a method of using kube_state_metrics or something?

I always try to imagine a cluster admin needing do this in an emergency.. providing an exact command makes it super fast..

Reviewer 3: In this specific case we can add a gauge metric reporting the values of configured max NUMA nodes. I literally don't know if this is a good practice, but this approach seems quick and straightforward to implement.

Reviewer: I don't think a metric is appropriate. It is not a feature that is used by workloads. It does not affect running workloads in any way. This feature is a property of the kubelet, and only affects how long it takes to admit a pod into the system. As such, the appropriate place to discover if this is enabled or not is by looking at the kubelet config.

Reviewer: This command could be used to pull the options and inspect them:
```
kubectl get --raw "/api/v1/nodes/<nodename>/proxy/configz" | jq '.kubeletconfig.TopologyManagerPolicyOptions'
```

Author: thanks, updated.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

<!--
For instance, if this is a pod-related feature, it should be possible to determine if the feature is functioning properly
for each individual pod.
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
- [x] Other (treat as last resort)

>   - Details: Inspect the kubelet configuration of the nodes: check feature gate and usage of the new option.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I'd know what to do based on this.  Can we add more detail?

Reviewer 3: to answer really precisely this we would need to characterize with big-O notation of the topology manager algorithms and possibly run some microbenchmark. But perhaps @klueska can chime in here and provide insights?

Reviewer: If their system has more than 8 NUMA nodes and the kubelet is not crashing, then the feature is working.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

> If the value set by the user is too high, it may cause performance regressions in the admission flow. 

Reviewer 2: Can we quantify "too high"?  We're looking to provide clear guidance of the safety boundaries here.

Reviewer 3: to answer really precisely this we would need to characterize with big-O notation of the topology manager algorithms and possibly run some microbenchmark. But perhaps @klueska can chime in here and provide insights?

Reviewer: This option really is a stop gap for teams that have more than 8 NUMA nodes on their machines and want to be able to use the TopologyManager on them. I would say this feature is use-at-your-own-risk until we have a proper solution in place to reduce the state explosion. There is no good way to characterize the impact at the moment, as every system is different.

Without this new flag, the choices are:
1. Don't enable the TopologyManager
2. Don't use kubernetes

With this flag, the choices are:
1. Don't enable the TopologyManager
2. Increase the value of `max-allowable-numa-nodes` and possibly suffer some performance impact

    heartbeats, leader election, etc.)
-->
No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type
  - Supported number of objects per cluster
  - Supported number of objects per namespace (for namespace-scoped objects)
-->
No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - Which API(s):
  - Estimated increase:
-->
No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type(s):
  - Estimated increase in size: (e.g., new annotation of size 32B)
  - Estimated amount of new objects: (e.g., new Object X for every existing Pod)
-->
No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

<!--
Look at the [existing SLIs/SLOs].

Think about adding additional work or introducing new steps in between
(e.g. need to do X to start a container), etc. Please describe the details.

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->

> It will slow down pod admission/start time on the node.

Reviewer 2: Can you add more detail about why the slow down occurs and also quantify the slow down? Is the slow down only for nodes using the feature or does it impact cluster not using the feature?

Reviewer: The slowdown occurs because the kubelet's TopoolgyManager now has more combinations it needs to consider when deciding where a cpus and devices can be allocated in an aligned. Before this feature -- the kubelet would crash, with this feature -- you get a potential slowdown, but at least the kubelet will run.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

<!--
Things to keep in mind include: additional in-memory state, additional
non-trivial computations, excessive access to disks (including increased log
volume), significant amount of data sent and/or received over network, etc.
This through this both in small and large cases, again with respect to the
[supported limits].

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
-->

> May increase the kubelet's CPU usage time.

Reviewer 2: Can you provide more detail explaining why and quantify, provide context for when this is expected to happen?

Reviewer: It will alway happen. But (as explained in the other comments), the alternative is that the kubelet will crash, saying it can't handle more than 8 NUMA nodes. If your system has, say 9 NUMA nodes, then you will not be able to run kubernetes on it without this feature. The purpose is then to provide an escape hatch for those that are OK paying the price of increased latency for pod admission (and its associated CPU/RAM costs) in order to allow the kubelet to run on such a node.

###### Can enabling / using this feature result in resource exhaustion of some node resources (PIDs, sockets, inodes, etc.)?

<!--
Focus not just on happy cases, but primarily on more pathological cases
(e.g. probes taking a minute instead of milliseconds, failed pods consuming resources, etc.).
If any of the resources can be exhausted, how this is mitigated with the existing limits
(e.g. pods per node) or new limits added by this KEP?

Are there any tests that were run/should be run to understand performance characteristics better
and validate the declared limits?
-->

> It may increase the node's memory usage, but it shouldn't cause "resource exhaustion".

Reviewer 2: same questions as above.  Can you provide more detail/quantification/context?

Reviewer: Same answer as above

### Troubleshooting

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?
N/A

###### What are other known failure modes?

> N/A

Reviewer 4: shadow prod readiness review

setting a too-low value for MaxAllowableNUMANodes is a failure mode?

Author: Yes, Setting a value lower 8 causes kubelet crash, and we also log it.

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

> 

Reviewer 4: shadow prod readiness review

Missing response here

Author: Thanks, Filled.

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

- 2024-05-08 - initial KEP draft created
- 2024-06-06 - updates per review feedback

## Drawbacks

> N/A

Reviewer 4: shadow prod readiness review

Can we list
- increased kubelet's CPU usage time
- increase in pod start time 

as limitations here? We can call out that these drawbacks are still better than outright failures that would happen without the feature today.

Author: Yes, updated.

Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
- [x] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details: If their system has more than 8 NUMA nodes, the TopologyManager is turned on and the kubelet is not crashing, then the feature is working.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

> This feature is use-at-your-own-risk until we have a proper solution in place to reduce the state explosion. There is no good way to characterize the impact at the moment, as every system is different.

Reviewer 2: This feature is going to beta and will become on-by-default for all clusters in 1.31?  If so, and I'm reading this right, I don't think this is an acceptable level of risk.  Have we considered remaining in alpha until a proper solution is in place?

Reviewer: On by default just means "a user can opt-in to set a value higher than 8 for max-allowable-numa-nodes". It doesn't mean that systems with more than 8 NUMA nodes will suddenly have this feature enabled. A user will have to actively set max-allowable-numa-nodes to soe value greater than 8 for it to take action. The default action will still to crash the kubelet on such systems.

Reviewer: I would be hesitant to do that because the whole point of this flag is to give people an "out" in situations where they are willing to accept a potential slowdown in order to not have their kubelet crash on them.

The limit of 8 was hard-coded previously, as a way to do exactly what you suggest, i.e. put a limit on the max value of the number of NUMA nodes that keeps the SLO below some expected time limit. This new flag is a way for people to ignore that and allow systems with a larger number of NUMA nodes to work if they are willing to accept the slowdown it (may) introduce.

Reviewer: In other words -- the actual *value* of this new setting doesn't impact the latency of pod admission. The latency is *only* influenced by the number of NUMA nodes your physical system has. This flag exists solely to allow a user to increase `max-allowable-numa-nodes` to match the number of NUMA nodes you have on the system, so that the kubelet doesn't crash when bringing the TopologyManager online.

Reviewer: @jpbetz I don't think @cyclinder will be back online before the KEP freeze later today. 

Can we agree to change the text above to the following text as a follow-up in the next day or two so that this PR can get merged:

> The value of `max-allowable-numa-nodes` does not (in and of itself) affect the latency of pod admission. With the TopologyManager enabled, the time to admit a pod is tied to the number of NUMA nodes on the physical machine. In the past, this was hard-coded at 8 to ensure that pod admission always completed in a reasonable amount of time. If a machine had more than 8 NUMA nodes, the kubelet would crash with a log message stating that the ToplogyManager is unsupported on machines with more than 8 NUMA nodes. With the new `max-allowable-numa-nodes` option, admins now have the ability to allow nodes with more than 8 NUMA nodes to run with the TopologyManager enabled. However, it is unknown exactly how much this will slow down pod admission on any given system. This feature is therefore to be used at-your-own-risk until we have a proper solution in place to reduce the state explosion that causes pod admission time to slow down as the number of NUMA nodes increases.

Reviewer 2: I'm okay with agreeing on something to update the kep with.

The "used at-your-own-risk until we have a proper solution in place" wording seems to conflict with what a beta feature should be aiming to achieve.  Can we also recommend a soft limit (64 NUMA nodes or something that we have reason to believe is safe) and also agree to fix the "state explosion" problem before GA?

Author: Thanks @klueska @jpbetz!, updated.

> The "used at-your-own-risk until we have a proper solution in place" wording seems to conflict with what a beta feature should be aiming to achieve.

As @klueska explains: this OPTION solves the problem of kubelet not being able to start when the NUMA nodes are more than 8 nodes, and the risk is only that it might increase the time for the pod to start, I think the risk is low enough. since the benefits it brings are obvious enough.

avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

In this KEP, we propose a new TopologyManager Policy Option called `max-allowable-numa-nodes` to configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager. the current hard-coded value of 8 was added as a stop-gap 4 years ago, a configurable option policy option can improve the topology manager to remove the state explosion that occurs when trying to enumerate the possible NUMA affinities and generating their hints. and should be sufficient to allow users to increase the limit when appropriate.

> what's the maxAllowableNUMANodes? maxAllowableNUMANodes specifies the maximum number of NUMA Nodes that the TopologyManager supports on the underlying machine. At present, having more than this number of NUMA Nodes will result in a state explosion when trying to enumerate possible NUMAAffinity masks and generate hints for them. As such, if more NUMA Nodes than this are present on a machine and the TopologyManager is enabled, an error will be returned and the TopologyManager will not be loaded.

Author: thanks a lot! let me add it here now.

## Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - Introduce a new TopologyManager Policy Option called `max-allowable-numa-nodes`.

Reviewer 3: let's try to express the intent more clearly:

Support high-end CPUs with more than 8 NUMA cells.

Author: thanks! done.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

1. As developer in the AI space, I want to use AI accelerators "super chips" which expose ARM cores with more than 8 NUMA nodes.  

2. As user in the high-performance-computing space, I want to enable the sub-NUMA or NUMA-per-socket option of my high-end x86 CPU, which will bring  
the count of NUMA nodes to exceed 8.  

3. As administrator of edge nodes, I want to use power-efficient yet massively parallel ARM chips which expose more 

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.

> -->

Reviewer 3: let's add a note like
```
setting values higher than the current default may cause performance degradation on admission time, because this is the flow on which the Topology Manager operates. Fixing this will require rearchitecting the Topology Manager and it is thus out of scope of this KEP
```

Author: thanks, done.

are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

Rollout or rollout fail do not impact already running workloads, only impact the new workloads.

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?

> -->

Reviewer 3: please mention the metric `kubelet_topology_manager_admission_time`

Author: okay, done.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

> We manually test it in our internal environment and it works. Rollout or upgrade do not impact already running workloads. We plan to add an e2e test for this in the furture.

Reviewer 3: I'd avoid to mention the manual testing, as it is not reproducible.

The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

We propose to add a new `TopologyManager` policy option called `max-allowable-numa-nodes` to the static TopologyManager policy. It can configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager. the current hard-coded value of 8 was added as a stop-gap 4 years ago, a configurable option policy option can improve the topology manager to remove the state explosion that occurs when trying to enumerate the possible NUMA affinities and generating their hints.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

1. As developer in the AI space, I want to use AI accelerators "super chips" which expose ARM cores with more than 8 NUMA nodes.  

2. As user in the high-performance-computing space, I want to enable the sub-NUMA or NUMA-per-socket option of my high-end x86 CPU, which will bring  
the count of NUMA nodes to exceed 8.  

> 3. As administrator of edge nodes, I want to use power-efficient yet massively parallel ARM chips which expose more 

Reviewer 3: all of those are conflated in a single story, please split in 3 stories

Author: sorry, fixed it.

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> In this KEP, we propose a new TopologyManager Policy Option called `max-allowable-numa-nodes` to configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager. the current hard-coded value of 8 was added as a stop-gap 4 years ago, a configurable option policy option can improve the topology manager to remove the state explosion that occurs when trying to enumerate the possible NUMA affinities and generating their hints. and should be sufficient to allow users to increase the limit when appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this KEP, we propose a new TopologyManager Policy Option called `max-allowable-numa-nodes` to configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager. The current hard-coded value of 8 was added as a stop-gap 4 years ago to mitigate the state explosion that occurs when trying to enumerate the possible NUMA affinities and generating their hints. By making this setting configurable, we give users the ability to increase this limit when appropriate.
```

Author: thanks, done

> what's the maxAllowableNUMANodes? maxAllowableNUMANodes specifies the maximum number of NUMA Nodes that the TopologyManager supports on the underlying machine. At present, having more than this number of NUMA Nodes will result in a state explosion when trying to enumerate possible NUMAAffinity masks and generate hints for them. As such, if more NUMA Nodes than this are present on a machine and the TopologyManager is enabled, an error will be returned and the TopologyManager will not be loaded.
> 
> to configure the value of the maximum number of NUMA cells (or, equivalently, "NUMA nodes") the Topology Manager will take into account when computing the optimal allocation. Because of the algorithm being used in the Topology Manager, we need a hard cap to the number of NUMA cells being considered. At present day, having more than this number of NUMA cells will result in a state explosion when trying to enumerate possible NUMA affinity masks and generate hints for them.
> The current hard-coded value of 8 was added as a stop-gap 4 years ago, a configurable option policy option can improve the topology manager behavior and support modern high-end CPUs which are more and more likely to expose more than 8 NUMA cells.
> 

Reviewer: I don't think any of this text is necessary. The first paragraph says it all...
```suggestion
```

Author: agree, done

## Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - Support high-end CPUs with more than 8 NUMA cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support high-end CPUs with more than 8 NUMA nodes.
```

Author: Done.

## Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

> - This proposal does not aim to modify the existing TopologyManager Policies. It focuses solely on introducing a new policy option to let users configure the maximum supported number of NUMA nodes.

Reviewer: Move this into goals.

Author: updated.

- It does not address other resource allocation or management aspects within Kubernetes.

> - Improve the topology manager to remove the state explosion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It does not attempt to remove the state explosion that still exists in the TopologyManager.
```

Author: done.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

We propose to add a new `TopologyManager` policy option called `max-allowable-numa-nodes` to the static TopologyManager policy. It can configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager. the current hard-coded value of 8 was added as a stop-gap 4 years ago, a configurable option policy option can improve the topology manager to remove the state explosion that occurs when trying to enumerate the possible NUMA affinities and generating their hints.

> 

Reviewer: I think we can just drop this section. The change is so minimal that the intro says it all.

Author: Yeah, dropped.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

> As developer in the AI space, I want to use AI accelerators "super chips" which expose ARM cores with more than 8 NUMA nodes.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a developer in the AI space, I want to use AI accelerators "super chips" which expose ARM cores with more than 8 NUMA nodes.  
```

#### Story 2

> As user in the high-performance-computing space, I want to enable the sub-NUMA or NUMA-per-socket option of my high-end x86 CPU, which will bring  
> the count of NUMA nodes to exceed 8.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a user in the high-performance-computing space, I want to enable the sub-NUMA or NUMA-per-socket option of my high-end x86 CPU, which will bring  
the count of NUMA nodes to exceed 8.  
```

Author: ! thanks!

#### Story 3

> As administrator of edge nodes, I want to use power-efficient yet massively parallel ARM chips which expose more 

Reviewer: This sentence is not complete....
```suggestion
As an administrator of edge nodes, I want to use power-efficient yet massively parallel ARM chips which expose more 
```

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

> Setting values higher than the current default may cause performance degradation on admission time, because this is the flow on which the Topology Manager operates. Fixing this will require rearchitecting the Topology Manager and it is thus out of scope of this KEP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting values higher than the current default may cause performance degradation at admission time. Users must either be willing to accept this or know that they won't actually be affected by it in their particular setup. Fixing this will require rearchitecting the Topology Manager and it is thus out of scope of this KEP.
```

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

The risk associated with implementing this new proposal is minimal. It pertains only to a distinct policy option within the `TopologyManager` and is safeguarded by the option's inherent security measures, in addition to the default deactivation of the `TopologyManagerPolicyBetaOptions` feature gate.

| Risk                                             | Impact | Mitigation |
| -------------------------------------------------| -------| ---------- |

> | Set a value lower 8 causes kubelet crash         | High   | the minimum value legal value should be the current hardcoded value(8), If not, we should log it and fail |

Reviewer: I don't understand this. Setting the value lower should be no problem. It just means the kubelet will fail if their actual machine has more NUMA nodes than is specified.
```suggestion
| Set a value lower 8 causes kubelet crash         | High   | the minimum value legal value should be the current hardcoded value(8), If not, we should log it and fail |
```

Reviewer 3: This was a suggestion of mine. Albeit legal, I see no value in restricting the maximum NUMA nodes the kubelet can deal with. Furthermore, it will be inconsistent with how cadvisor reports the data about the machine. If we had a common central way to expose a subset of the machine HW, it would have been different, but in this case I see only a source of confusion.

That said if you think differently and prefer a more GIGO approach I'm open to change direction.

Reviewer: OK; I'm fine with leaving it. The only reason someone might want to reduce it is if their platform is so resource constrained that even calculating with 8 NUMA nodes is problematic. However, if their node is so resource constrained in the first place, then it probably won't actually be that slow (because there wont be many devices it needs to do calculations across).

Author: I will contiune keep this here :)

| Set a value too high                             |  Low   | add a log when starting. If possible, we should mark the node Degraded somehow because allocation performance could be significantly slow |

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> Users can configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager when the kubelet starts up, It will be fail and abort if the user set the value is lower than the current hardcoded default (8).

Reviewer: I don't understand this. Why do we need to error out in this case?
```suggestion
Users can configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager when the kubelet starts up, It will fail and abort if the user sets the value is lower than the current hardcoded default (8).
```

Reviewer 3: same reasoning as https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4624#discussion_r1629276775

Reviewer: Ack

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

For beta:

- Verify the input validation with the existing e2e tests(e.g. 9 or 10 or something bigger than the current default but not "too big")

For GA:

- degrading the node and checking the node is reported as degraded

### Graduation Criteria

#### Beta

- Feature implemented behind the existing static policy feature flag
- Initial unit tests completed and coverage is improved
- Documents is improved and enough guidance and examples can be given to potential users.
- Add a e2e test to verify the input validation.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

> We anticipate no repercussions. The new policy option is voluntary and operates independently from the current selections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We anticipate no repercussions. The new policy option is voluntary and operates independent of the existing options.
```

Author: Done.

-->

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

<!--

Production readiness reviews are intended to ensure that features merging into
Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

> 

Reviewer: You need to put some text here.

  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control plane? No
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning of a node? (Do not assume Dynamic Kubelet Config feature is enabled). Yes -- a kubelet restart is required.

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

No. 

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->

Yes, When it is disabled once (i.e. no value is set), this falls back to the default behavior.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

> If we reactivate the feature after a rollback, the outcome remains unchanged. Current containers will retain their allocations, while newly created containers will be affected.

Reviewer: I don't understand this. The change only affects the time to do cpu/memory/device allocation. It has nothing to do with previously running containers.

Reviewer 3: I understood this part as like "running containers won't be affected by the rollback of the feature, only newly created will".

Reviewer: Let's change it to that then

Author: Updated, thanks for the advice.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> This new `TopologyManager` policy option start from beta stage. The unit test will test whether the configured value of max-allowable-numa-nodes is as expected and whether it is the default recommended value when it is not configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new `TopologyManager` policy option will start immediately from beta stage. The unit tests will test whether the configured value of `max-allowable-numa-nodes` is as expected and whether it is the default recommended value when it is not configured.
```

Author: Done.

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.

Additionally, for features that are introducing a new API field, unit tests that
are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

> 

Reviewer: Since we are going straight to beta, something needs to be here

Author: Updated

will rollout across nodes.
-->

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

We have a metric which records the topology manager admission time: "kubelet_topology_manager_admission_time".

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

Rollout or upgrade do not impact already running workloads. We plan to add an e2e test for this in the furture.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

<!--
Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.
-->
No.

### Monitoring Requirements

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

> 

Reviewer: Since we are going straight to beta, some text is needed here.

Reviewer 3: it should be sufficient to mention the metric (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4624#discussion_r1627545603) can be used to check if the setting is causing unacceptable performance drops

Author: yeah, we have a metric for it, we can mention  it here. updated.

-->

N/A

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

<!--
Think about both cluster-level services (e.g. metrics-server) as well
as node-level agents (e.g. specific version of CRI). Focus on external or
optional services that are needed. For example, if this feature depends on
a cloud provider API, or upon an external software-defined storage or network
control plane.

For each of these, fill in the following—thinking about running existing user workloads
and creating new ones, as well as about cluster-level services (e.g. DNS):
  - [Dependency name]
    - Usage description:
      - Impact of its outage on the feature:
      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:
-->

No. It doesn't rely on other Kubernetes components.

### Scalability

<!--
For alpha, this section is encouraged: reviewers should consider these questions
and attempt to answer them.

For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

> 

Reviewer: Since we are going straight to beta, some text is needed here.

### Troubleshooting

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?
N/A

###### What are other known failure modes?

N/A

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

> 

Reviewer: This needs to be filled out

## Drawbacks

> 
> Adding a new kubelet configuration option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done, thanks

> 
> N/A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

Adding a new kubelet configuration option.

> ## Infrastructure Needed (Optional)
> 
> <!--
> Use this section if you need things from the project/SIG. Examples include a
> new subproject, repos requested, or GitHub details. Listing these here allows a
> SIG to get the process for these resources started right away.
> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!--
## Infrastructure Needed (Optional)

Use this section if you need things from the project/SIG. Examples include a
new subproject, repos requested, or GitHub details. Listing these here allows a
SIG to get the process for these resources started right away.
-->
```

Author: Done

<!--
**Note:** When your KEP is complete, all of these comment blocks should be removed.

To get started with this template:

- [ ] **Pick a hosting SIG.**
  Make sure that the problem space is something the SIG is interested in taking
  up. KEPs should not be checked in without a sponsoring SIG.
- [ ] **Create an issue in kubernetes/enhancements**
  When filing an enhancement tracking issue, please make sure to complete all
  fields in that template. One of the fields asks for a link to the KEP. You
  can leave that blank until this KEP is filed, and then go back to the
  enhancement and add the link.
- [ ] **Make a copy of this template directory.**
  Copy this template into the owning SIG's directory and name it
  `NNNN-short-descriptive-title`, where `NNNN` is the issue number (with no
  leading-zero padding) assigned to your enhancement above.
- [ ] **Fill out as much of the kep.yaml file as you can.**
  At minimum, you should fill in the "Title", "Authors", "Owning-sig",
  "Status", and date-related fields.
- [ ] **Fill out this file as best you can.**
  At minimum, you should fill in the "Summary" and "Motivation" sections.

>   These should be easy if you've preflighted the idea of the KEP with the

Author: thanks, update it now.

what's the maxAllowableNUMANodes? maxAllowableNUMANodes specifies the maximum number of NUMA Nodes that the TopologyManager supports on the underlying machine. At present, having more than this number of NUMA Nodes will result in a state explosion when trying to enumerate possible NUMAAffinity masks and generate hints for them. As such, if more NUMA Nodes than this are present on a machine and the TopologyManager is enabled, an error will be returned and the TopologyManager will not be loaded.

## Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
- Introduce a new TopologyManager Policy Option called `max-allowable-numa-nodes`.

> - Improve the topology manager to remove the state explosion.

Author: I think you are right, this should be a non-goal here. update it now.

## Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

> - This proposal does not aim to modify the existing TopologyManager Policies. It focuses solely on introducing a new policy for spreading the max allowable numa nodes.

Author: thanks!

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

We propose to add a new `TopologyManager` policy option called `max-allowable-numa-nodes` to the static TopologyManager policy. It can configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager. the current hard-coded value of 8 was added as a stop-gap 4 years ago, a configurable option policy option can improve the topology manager to remove the state explosion that occurs when trying to enumerate the possible NUMA affinities and generating their hints.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

> #### Story 1

Author: thanks! It's a little hard for me to find a user story.

> #### Story 1

Reviewer 3: Sketch of user stories (3)
```
1. As developer in the AI space, I want to use AI accelerators "super chips" which expose ARM cores with more than 8 NUMA nodes.

1. As user in the high-performance-computing space, I want to enable the sub-NUMA or NUMA-per-socket option of my high-end x86 CPU, which will bring
the count of NUMA nodes to exceed 8.

1. As administrator of edge nodes, I want to use power-efficient yet massively parallel ARM chips which expose more than 8 NUMA nodes.
```

> #### Story 1

Author: Thanks for thess user stories, now I add it to the kep.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

The risk associated with implementing this new proposal is minimal. It pertains only to a distinct policy option within the `TopologyManager` and is safeguarded by the option's inherent security measures, in addition to the default deactivation of the `TopologyManagerPolicyBetaOptions` feature gate.

| Risk                                             | Impact | Mitigation |
| -------------------------------------------------| -------| ---------- |

> | setting a value too small causes kubelet crash   | High   | do not set it or set a larger value |

Author: Is the value set should be at least greater than 8? Sorry, I'm not sure it makes sense when we set a value less than 8.

> | setting a value too small causes kubelet crash   | High   | do not set it or set a larger value |

Reviewer 3: it is the current hardcoded value so I see no reason to lower this. But I'm open to chat.

> | setting a value too small causes kubelet crash   | High   | do not set it or set a larger value |

Author: That makes sense, I agree with no reason to lower this.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> Users can configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager when the kubelet starts up, If they are not set or are set to 0, this will fall back to using the default recommended value of 8.

Author: It's ok to me, how do we define the value as too low?  the minimum value should be 1, "too low" means is if the value is 0?

> Users can configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager when the kubelet starts up, If they are not set or are set to 0, this will fall back to using the default recommended value of 8.

Reviewer 3: values less than 1 makes no sense and should cause kubelet abort. Values between 2 and the current hardcoded default (8) are open for discussion. I'd still fail, but I'm not too attached to this opinion.

> Users can configure the value of maxAllowableNUMANodes in the TopologyManager when the kubelet starts up, If they are not set or are set to 0, this will fall back to using the default recommended value of 8.

Author: The minimum value should be the current hardcoded default (8),  no reason to lower it so far.

##### Integration tests

<!--
Integration tests are contained in k8s.io/kubernetes/test/integration.
Integration tests allow control of the configuration parameters used to start the binaries under test.
This is different from e2e tests which do not allow configuration of parameters.
Doing this allows testing non-default options and multiple different and potentially conflicting command line options.
-->

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

No new integration tests for kubelet are planned.

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

> TBD

Author: makes sense to me!

### Graduation Criteria

#### Beta

- Feature implemented behind the existing static policy feature flag
- Initial unit tests completed and coverage is improved

> - Documents is improved and enough guidance and examples can be given to potential users.

Reviewer 3: let's record the decision regarding e2e tests once the decision is made

Author: okay, thanks

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

This new `TopologyManager` policy option start from beta stage. The unit test will test whether the configured value of max-allowable-numa-nodes is as expected and whether it is the default recommended value when it is not configured.

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.

Additionally, for features that are introducing a new API field, unit tests that
are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

> ###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

Reviewer 3: need answers in this section

Author: Like the other policy options, I think the rollout doesn't impact already running workloads 🤔, but I need an ack for this.

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

> We manually test it in our internal environment and it works. It's worth doing automated upgrade/rollback tests in the future.

Reviewer 3: unfortunately manual testing is not great for a KEP :) however I think that answering the questions above should be sufficient to pass the review here

Author: :)

Author: We plan to add an e2e test for this in the future, is ok?

Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
- [x] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details: Inspect the kubelet configuration of the nodes: check feature gate and usage of the new option.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

> It won't cause any performance regression. So we don't need to define any SLOs for this feature.

Reviewer 3: arguably a value too high CAN cause performance regressions in the admission flow.
OTOH in the current state of things it doesn't work at all which is probably a even worse performance?
I think we should somehow still mention the performance implication though

Author: > arguably a value too high CAN cause performance regressions in the admission flow

Could you explain more details about this? thanks.

Reviewer 3: The reason we add 8 is because the internal current topology manager logic need to compute states using an algorithm which will create many states. I think is something along the lines of `O(N**2)` if I'm not mistaken? Please don't quote me, need to check. However , the algo it is surely super-linear so the processing time of  the topology manager decision changes accordingly.
Now, Topology Manager runs in the kubelet admission flow. Users should be aware that if they set `max-allowable-numa-nodes` say 16, then Topology Manager it won't run roughly 2 times slower, but much slower.

Author: thanks for the detail!

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [ ] Metrics
  - Metric name:
  - [Optional] Aggregation method:
  - Components exposing the metric:
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)

>   - Details:

Reviewer 3: I think we have a metric which records the topology manager admission time. We can mention this here.

Author: what's the mean of the topology manager admission time here?

Reviewer 3: explained here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4624#discussion_r1602676099

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->

> N/A

Reviewer 3: perhaps we can abuse metrics to report the configured value? let's hear from other reviewers

Author: /cc @klueska

Reviewer 2: Something to provide a better answer to the "How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?" might be appropriate here.

Reviewer 3: ok, so this seems to circle back to https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4624/files#r1635931602 / https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4624/files#r1598220901
In addition, may be worth adding explicitly in the text that this is a node feature, so all the pods which qualify to be aligned by topology manager will use implicitly this feature

Reviewer: The feature is not used by workloads in any way shape or form. This feature only (potentially) impacts how long it takes for the kubelet to start a workload. If you really want a metric to be emitted to show the value of this setting, I won't block that, but it seems silly to abuse metrics in this way when it's just as easy to check the configuration to see if it's enabled.

Reviewer 3: For the sake of clarity: I'm completely neutral about adding metrics. I tend to agree that adding metrics seems not a good fit in this case but I'm pretty green about the monitoring world, so my intuition may be out of line. So I'm not pushing for metrics and I agree a good example about how to check the config is sufficient.

Author: Agree, we should provide an example to check the config.

    heartbeats, leader election, etc.)
-->
No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type
  - Supported number of objects per cluster
  - Supported number of objects per namespace (for namespace-scoped objects)
-->
No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - Which API(s):
  - Estimated increase:
-->
No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type(s):
  - Estimated increase in size: (e.g., new annotation of size 32B)
  - Estimated amount of new objects: (e.g., new Object X for every existing Pod)
-->
No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

<!--
Look at the [existing SLIs/SLOs].

Think about adding additional work or introducing new steps in between
(e.g. need to do X to start a container), etc. Please describe the details.

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->

> No

Reviewer 3: Uhm, right, I think we don't have SLIs/SLOs about pod admission time in the kubelet. Or do we?

Author: As far as I know, we don't have this, but better to confirm by other reviewers.

Reviewer: Just mention that it will slow down pod admission / start time on the node.

Author: done

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

<!--
Things to keep in mind include: additional in-memory state, additional
non-trivial computations, excessive access to disks (including increased log
volume), significant amount of data sent and/or received over network, etc.
This through this both in small and large cases, again with respect to the
[supported limits].

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
-->

> No

Reviewer 3: perhaps yes CPU time in the admission logic

Author: oh yes, you are right.

###### Can enabling / using this feature result in resource exhaustion of some node resources (PIDs, sockets, inodes, etc.)?

<!--
Focus not just on happy cases, but primarily on more pathological cases
(e.g. probes taking a minute instead of milliseconds, failed pods consuming resources, etc.).
If any of the resources can be exhausted, how this is mitigated with the existing limits
(e.g. pods per node) or new limits added by this KEP?

Are there any tests that were run/should be run to understand performance characteristics better
and validate the declared limits?
-->

> No

Reviewer 3: not sure about how "state explosion" will lead to more memory being used by the kubelet, if at all. However this should not cause "resource exhaustion" and we can defer to the GA graduation

Author: It may increase the node's memory usage, but it shouldn't cause "resource exhaustion", right?

splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?
N/A

###### What are other known failure modes?

N/A

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

N/A

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.

> -->

Reviewer 3: let's mention adding a new kubelet configuration option here

Author: thanks for the mention!

Reviewer 4: shadow prod readiness review

Can we add more context regarding why we didn't choose this alternative as our solution?
